### Paper 1

#### SECTION A

**Q1. Write notes on the following in about 150 words each:** (10x5=50)  
(a) Double Descent  
(b) Genealogical Method  
(c) Major sub-divisions of Anthropology  
(d) Ecological Anthropology  
(e) Field work tradition in Anthropology

**Q2.**  
(a) Critically examine the role of anthropology in Contemporary India. (15)  
(b) Is culture unique to human beings? Critically examine. (15)  
(c) Discuss the role of anthropology in the understanding of health and disease. What specific understanding is available with respect to infectious and non-infectious diseases? (20)

**Q3.**  
(a) Discuss the nature of Law and Justice in simple societies citing suitable examples. (20)  
(b) Define marriage and describe the various types of marriages in human societies. (15)  
(c) Define Status and Role. Distinguish between Ascribed and Achieved Status. (15)

**Q4.**  
(a) What is functionalism? Discuss the functional approach to the understanding of Religion. (20)  
(b) What is understood by ‘Rites of Passage’? Describe the various phases of the ‘Rites of Passage’ and their significance. (20)  
(c) Differentiate between State and Stateless Societies. (10)

#### SECTION B

**Q5. Write notes on the following in about 150 words each:** (10x5=50)  
(a) Cross-sectional methods of studying human growth  
(b) Genetic Counselling  
(c) Epidemiological Anthropology  
(d) Asian Homo erectus  
(e) Fertility and Fecundity

**Q6.**  
(a) What are the different stages of Growth? Describe any one of them in detail. (20)  
(b) Describe Turner and Klinefelter Syndromes in humans. (15)  
(c) What are the stresses at high altitudes? How do better cardio-respiratory functions help the native highlanders in combating low environmental pressure? (15)

**Q7.**  
(a) Discuss the factors affecting gene frequencies among human populations. (20)  
(b) Elucidate the skeletal differences between humans and chimpanzees. (15)  
(c) Discuss the relevance of menarche, menopause and other bio-events to fertility. (15)

**Q8.**  
(a) Discuss Ageing and Senescence. Describe either the biological or social theories of Ageing. (20)  
(b) Describe the absolute dating methods in Archaeology, highlighting the importance of each method. (15)  
(c) Describe the Neolithic culture of India. (15)

---

### Paper 2

#### SECTION A

**Q1. Write short notes on the following in about 150 words each:** (10x5=50)  
(a) Neolithic cultures of N-E India  
(b) Tribe-Caste continuum  
(c) Great tradition and Little tradition  
(d) Major linguistic divisions of India  
(e) Contribution of H. H. Risley to the ‘Aryan’ debate

**Q2.**  
(a) Describe what is known of Harappan Religion. Have some of its elements continued into later Hinduism? Discuss. (20)  
(b) Describe the concept of ‘Sacred Complex’ with an ethnographic example. (15)  
(c) Do you think caste persists in contemporary India? Critically discuss. (15)

**Q3.**  
(a) Define the concept ‘Dominant Caste’ and examine its relevance in the contemporary Indian village with suitable examples. (20)  
(b) Discuss the contribution of Islam to the composite culture of India. (15)  
(c) Discuss the importance of the ethno-archaeological approach to the study of indigenous craft in India. (15)

**Q4.**  
(a) Discuss the contributions of S. C. Roy to understanding the tribes of India. (20)  
(b) Describe the evolutionary significance of the fossil finds of the Narmada Basin. (15)  
(c) Outline the distribution of Dravidian languages in India and describe their cultural significance. (15)

#### SECTION B

**Q5. Write short notes on the following in about 150 words each:** (10x5=50)  
(a) Biogenetic variations of Indian tribes  
(b) Social and economic marginalization of tribal people  
(c) Forest policy and tribes  
(d) The concept of PTG  
(e) Impact of Christianity on tribes

**Q6.**  
(a) Critically examine the constitutional provisions for safeguarding the interests of Scheduled Tribes in India. (20)  
(b) Discuss the impact of land alienation on the tribes of Central India. (15)  
(c) Critically evaluate the National Tribal Policy. (15)

**Q7.**  
(a) Discuss the impact of globalization on the livelihood of the tribal populations. (20)  
(b) What are the significant factors responsible for tribal unrest? (15)  
(c) Discuss the rise of ethno-nationalism among Indian tribes with specific example. (15)

**Q8.**  
(a) Critically assess the role of anthropologists in rural development. (20)  
(b) Critically examine the role of NGOs in promoting health and education in tribal areas. (15)  
(c) Describe the history of tribal administration in the colonial period. (15)