## SECTION A

### 1. Write notes on the following in about 150 words each: (10x5=50)

(a) The Relevance of Anthropology  
(b) Difference between Science and Magic  
(c) Town Planning of Harappan Culture  
(d) Kinship Terminology  
(e) Ways of Acquiring Mate in Tribal Society

### 2.

(a) Explain the biological changes that made human beings capable of making culture. (20)  
(b) How does customary law function in the tribal society? Discuss its different sources. (15)  
(c) What do you understand by the National Character Study? Illustrate the concept. (15)

### 3.

(a) Define ethnography and present a brief history of ethnographic studies. (20)  
(b) Give an account of the consequences of food production of Neolithic culture. (15)  
(c) Critically examine that the structure and content of language are influenced by culture. (15)

### 4.

(a) How is case study method helpful in understanding a social phenomena? Explain with suitable example. (20)  
(b) Describe the culture related to Homo erectus. (15)  
(c) Write the characteristics of hunting and gathering economy. (15)

## SECTION B

### 5. Write notes on the following in about 150 words each: (10x5=50)

(a) Gordon Childe’s Theory of Cultural Evolution  
(b) Advanced Molecular Anthropology Techniques  
(c) Categorize Genes that influence Human Survival  
(d) Race is a Myth. Justify its Present Day Relevance  
(e) Issues of Elderly and Senescence in Developing and Developed Countries

### 6.

(a) Explain the mechanisms of human variation in gene frequencies. (20)  
(b) Do Allen’s rule and Bergmann’s rule hold for human populations? Explain with examples. (15)  
(c) Explain the impact of discovery of iron technology on contemporary society. (15)

### 7.

(a) Describe the mechanisms for structural anomalies of autosomes with diagrams. (20)  
(b) Describe the principles of radiocarbon dating. Mention its limitations. (15)  
(c) Narrate evolution of disease and major causes of ill health in human populations. (15)

### 8.

(a) Distinguish between adaptation, adaptability and acclimatization with examples. (20)  
(b) Define fecundity and explain major factors affecting fecundity in Indian populations. (15)  
(c) Give an account of the field methods used in the study of Archaeological Anthropology. (15)

# ANTHROPOLOGY (PAPER-II)

## SECTION A

### 1. Write short notes on the following in about 150 words each: (10x5=50)

(a) Distinctive cultural features of tribes of Andaman islands  
(b) Philosophy behind Purusharthas  
(c) Endangered Languages  
(d) OBCs among non-Hindu communities  
(e) Ethnoarchaeology as a research strategy

### 2.

(a) Explain the contribution of tribal cultures to Indian civilization. (20)  
(b) Describe the salient features of Sivapithecus. (15)  
(c) Discuss the impact of market economy on rural villages. (15)

### 3.

(a) Examine the regional variations of mesolithic cultures of India. (20)  
(b) Based on historical and contemporary evidences discuss the future of caste system in India. (15)  
(c) Examine the colonial administrators’ view that Indian villages can be considered as ‘little republics’. (15)

### 4.

(a) Explain the impact of Buddhism and Jainism on Indian society. (20)  
(b) What are the various factors influencing population growth in India? Discuss. (15)  
(c) Discuss the view that caste is not social stratification, but a system of hierarchy. (15)

## SECTION B

### 5. Write short notes on the following in about 150 words each: (10x5=50)

(a) Youth dormitory as an institution  
(b) Tribe and scheduled tribe  
(c) Agrarian social structure  
(d) The impact of Panchayati Raj institutions in rural areas  
(e) Modernization

### 6.

(a) Compare and contrast the economic typology of tribes given by different anthropologists. (20)  
(b) Discuss the contribution of S. C. Roy in the study of tribal cultures in India. (15)  
(c) Examine the advancement made in the land acquisition and rehabilitation Act of 2013 over the land acquisition Act of 1894. (15)

### 7.

(a) Critically examine the contributions of Makhan Jha and B. N. Saraswati to the study of sacred complexes in India. (20)  
(b) Discuss the various factors resulting in tribal unrest in various parts of India. (15)  
(c) Discuss the salient features of PESA Act of 1996 and attempt a comparison with the features of the VI Schedule. (15)

### 8.

(a) Examine the strengths and weaknesses of anthropology in the context of its role in tribal and rural development. (20)  
(b) Explain the significance of tribe-caste continuum in the present context. (15)  
(c) Discuss the significance and implementation of ‘Recognition of Forest Right’s Act 2006’. (15)