### Paper 1

#### SECTION A

**Q1. Write notes on the following in about 150 words each:** (10x5=50) 
(a) How do you situate Anthropology in Social Sciences?  
(b) Various types of descent  
(c) Totemism  
(d) Linguistic Anthropology  
(e) Carbon-14 method of dating

**Q2.**  
(a) Why has the concept of Culture Relativism been so dear to Anthropologists? (250 words) (20)  
(b) Bring out the distinguishing features of culture and civilization. (250 words) (15)  
(c) Where do you situate ‘live-in relationship’ within the institution of marriage? (250 words) (15)

**Q3.**  
(a) Discuss the impact of globalization on tribal economy. (350 words) (20)  
(b) In what ways is Functionalism different from Structural Functionalism? (350 words) (20)  
(c) Differentiate between Economics and Economic Anthropology. (150 words) (10)

**Q4.**  
(a) Discuss the impact of urbanization and feminist movement on family. (250 words) (20)  
(b) Bring out the contribution of Turner and Geertz in symbolic and interpretive theories in Anthropology. (250 words) (15)  
(c) How does taboo serve as a means of social control? (250 words) (15)

#### SECTION B

**Q5. Write notes on the following in about 150 words each:** (10x5=50)  
(a) Role of primatology in Anthropological studies  
(b) Differentiation between Child Growth and Development  
(c) Ageing and Senescence  
(d) Twin method in human genetics  
(e) Demographic transition

**Q6.**  
(a) Give a broad outline of Paleolithic culture emphasizing upon its tool technology. (250 words) (20)  
(b) What do you understand by ‘Genetic Load’ in a population? How is it measured and what are the important factors that can influence it? (250 words) (15)  
(c) Justify “Though human growth is under tight genetic control but it is influenced by various environmental factors.” (250 words) (15)

**Q7.**  
(a) Discuss the relevance of Case Study method of data collection. (250 words) (20)  
(b) Elaborate upon major human adaptations to heat and cold. (250 words) (15)  
(c) What are genetic markers and what is their usefulness? Why are blood groups considered as good genetic markers? Illustrate with examples. (250 words) (15)

**Q8.**  
(a) Discuss how Neo-Darwinism integrated the fields of Genetics and Evolution. (250 words) (20)  
(b) What is meant by epidemiological transition? Elaborate upon its causes and consequences highlighting major health problems of our adult population today. (250 words) (15)  
(c) Differentiate between Race and Racism. What are three major races of the world? Give important biological criteria used frequently for such a classification. (250 words) (15)

---

### Paper 2

#### SECTION A

**Q1. Write short notes on the following in about 150 words each:** (10x5=50)  
(a) Sufi tradition of Islam  
(b) Threat to tribal languages in India  
(c) Examine the debates related to Ramapithecus  
(d) Discuss how Louis Dumont explained caste system  
(e) Discuss salient features of Mesolithic culture in India with special reference to western India

**Q2.**  
(a) Examine Nature-man-spirit complex as an ecological concept. (250 words) (15)  
(b) Indian Paleolithic culture can neither be conceived chronologically homogenous nor as a uniform cultural phase. — Discuss. (250 words) (15)  
(c) Discuss the significance of study of religious centres to the understanding of Indian civilization. (250 words) (20)

**Q3.**  
(a) Examine the anthropological contributions dealing with tribes and Indian civilization. (375 words) (25)  
(b) What is Jajmani system? Examine the views on Jajmani system as an egalitarian as well as exploitative system. Give reasons for its decline. (375 words) (25)

**Q4.**  
(a) Indian farmers are not slow to react to economic opportunities. — Discuss this statement. (250 words) (15)  
(b) Examine the criticisms on the concept of dominant caste. (250 words) (15)  
(c) Discuss the contributions of H. D. Sankalia to prehistoric anthropology in India. (250 words) (20)

#### SECTION B

**Q5. Write short notes on the following in about 150 words each:** (10x5=50)  
(a) Government Action towards Left Wing Extremism  
(b) Role of Gramasabha under PESA  
(c) Impacts of sanctuaries and national parks on tribal populations  
(d) Linguistic classification of Indian tribes  
(e) Ethnic movements in India

**Q6.**  
(a) Fifth Schedule and Sixth Schedule of the constitution are built on the foundations laid by the colonial Government. — Discuss. (250 words) (20)  
(b) Discuss the significance of cultural and administrative factors in tribal development. (250 words) (15)  
(c) Examine the impacts of green revolution on rural poor. (250 words) (15)

**Q7.**  
(a) Discuss the criticism levelled against anthropology in the context of ‘Isolation, and assimilation debate’ on tribal populations. (250 words) (20)  
(b) Assess the contributions of early 20th century ethnographic tradition to Indian anthropology. (250 words) (15)  
(c) Discuss how British policies dispossessed tribals of their communal properties and agricultural lands. (250 words) (15)

**Q8.**  
(a) Discuss alternatives for shifting cultivators in the context of ecological costs and humanistic concerns. (250 words) (20)  
(b) Examine the impact of non-tribal contact on socio-cultural institutions of tribal people with suitable examples. (250 words) (15)  
(c) Discuss the Social disabilities suffered by scheduled castes. (250 words) (15)