#### SECTION—A

**1. Write notes on the following in about 150 words each:** (10x5=50)  
(a) Bilineal and bilateral descents  
(b) Difference between religion and magic  
(c) Basic tenets of structural-functionalism  
(d) Non-verbal communication  
(e) Questionnaire

**2.**  
(a) Discuss the development of the concept of culture in Anthropology. (20)  
(b) Elucidate the determinants of Kinship terminology. (15)  
(c) Discuss the different forms of preferential marriage with suitable examples from tribal societies in India. (15)

**3.**  
(a) Discuss the different traditional forms of religion in tribal societies. (20)  
(b) Mention the characteristic features of band with suitable examples. (15)  
(c) With the help of appropriate examples, explain the various forms of exchange system. (15)

**4.**  
(a) Explain Ruth Benedict’s patterns of culture. (20)  
(b) Elucidate the basic characteristics of anthropological fieldwork methods. (15)  
(c) Critically examine the Stewardian view of neo-evolutionism. (15)

#### SECTION—B

**5. Write notes on the following in about 150 words each:** (10x5=50)  
(a) Hardy-Weinberg law  
(b) Salient features of Mesolithic culture  
(c) Concept of race  
(d) Age at menarche  
(e) Anthropology and designing of equipments

**6.**  
(a) Define Anthropology. Describe the major branches of Anthropology elaborating on any one branch. (5+15=20)  
(b) Bring out the comparative anatomical features of man and apes. Discuss their evolutionary significance. (15)  
(c) What are dating methods? Discuss one absolute method and one relative method in detail. (15)

**7.**  
(a) Briefly describe the various methods used in the genetic study of man. (20)  
(b) Discuss the responses and acclimatization to high altitude stresses. (15)  
(c) Describe the biological and socio-ecological factors affecting fertility and mortality. (15)

**8.**  
(a) What are the methods of personal identification? Critically examine how personal identification helps in criminal investigations. (20)  
(b) Describe the various methods of studying growth highlighting their merits and demerits. (15)  
(c) Discuss Sheldon’s method of somatotyping. (15)

---

### ANTHROPOLOGY (PAPER-II)

#### SECTION—A

**1. Write short notes on the following in about 150 words each:** (10x5=50)  
(a) Neolithic cultures of South India  
(b) Austro-asiatic linguistic groups in India  
(c) Varnashram and the concept of Rina  
(d) Ethno-archaeology  
(e) Nature-man-spirit complex

**2.**  
(a) Discuss the contribution of Nirmal Kumar Bose to the understanding of Indian society. (20)  
(b) Describe the salient features of chalcolithic cultures of the Deccan. (15)  
(c) Critically discuss the constitutional safeguards for the Scheduled Castes. (15)

**3.**  
(a) Discuss the impact of market economy on the Jajmani system. (20)  
(b) Describe the salient features of Ramapithecus. (15)  
(c) Discuss the social, political and economic status of Muslims in India. (15)

**4.**  
(a) Explain how Buddhism influenced the economic and cultural transformations of Indian society. (20)  
(b) Describe various aspects of trade and religion of Harappan civilization. (15)  
(c) Discuss the impact of media as an instrument of social change. (15)

#### SECTION—B

**5. Write short notes on the following in about 150 words each:** (10x5=50)  
(a) Indebtedness among tribal communities  
(b) Ethnicity and regionalism  
(c) Other Backward Class  
(d) Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (earlier known as PTG)  
(e) Impact of Christianity on Indian tribes

**6.**  
(a) Describe the impact of displacement on the health and nutritional status of tribal communities. (20)  
(b) Discuss the emergence, salient features and limitations of Tribal sub-plan. (15)  
(c) Give a critical evaluation of any one anthropological village study in India. (15)

**7.**  
(a) Critically evaluate the term ‘tribe’ (as used in India) as compared to the term ‘indigenous’ in some other countries. (20)  
(b) Discuss the impact of Panchayati Raj institution on the empowerment of rural women in India. (15)  
(c) Give a critical appraisal of any one tribal development programme during XIIth Five-Year plan. Give your suggestions for any improvement in the programme. (15)

**8.**  
(a) Give your assessment of the reasons for the imbalance in the sex-ratio in India. (20)  
(b) Discuss the relevance of art and craft traditions in the understanding of Indian archaeology. (15)  
(c) Discuss the contribution of anthropology in understanding the loss of livelihood of tribal communities due to economic and ecological factors. (15)