
### Paper 1

#### SECTION A

**Q1. Write notes on the following in about 150 words each :** (10x5=50)  
(a) The relationship between Linguistics and Social-Cultural Anthropology (10)  
(b) Cultural Relativism (10)  
(c) Pastoralism in India (10)  
(d) Cultural Materialism (10)  
(e) Relative Dating Methods (10)

**Q2.**  
(a) Discuss the evolutionary significance of bipedalism and erect posture. (20)  
(b) How did Radcliffe-Brown and Levi-Strauss study kinship in terms of social structure? (15)  
(c) Elucidate Mesolithic culture and associated rock art with examples from India. (15)

**Q3.**  
(a) Discuss social stratification according to any three major approaches. (20)  
(b) “Europeans are closer to Neanderthals.” Critically discuss in view of the African origin of humankind. (15)  
(c) Discuss briefly the major traditions in the Upper Palaeolithic culture of Europe. (15)

**Q4.**  
(a) With reference to the somatoscopic and morphometric characteristics commonly used for racial classification, make critical comments as to whether ‘Race’ is a valid concept. (20)  
(b) Critically explain the anthropological approaches to religion. (15)  
(c) Differentiate between transient and balanced genetic polymorphism. Illustrate your answer with suitable examples from human populations. (15)

#### SECTION B

**Q5. Write notes on the following in about 150 words each :** (10x5=50)  
(a) Adaptive primate radiation (10)  
(b) Implications of mutation in evolution (10)  
(c) Olduvai Gorge (10)  
(d) Anthropological inputs in facial reconstruction (10)  
(e) Genetico-environmental factors affecting human growth (10)

**Q6.**  
(a) Examine critically the contributions of Victor Turner and Clifford Geertz in anthropology. (20)  
(b) “Human adaptations are always bio-cultural in nature.” Discuss with reference to human adaptation to high-altitude climate. (15)  
(c) Discuss the methods of studying human growth with their merits and demerits. (15)

**Q7.**  
(a) Discuss how indigenous people encounter globalization. (20)  
(b) “Applied human genetics has come to touch every sphere of human life.” Discuss in light of recent advances in molecular anthropology. (15)  
(c) Evaluate participant observation in producing anthropological knowledge. (15)

**Q8.**  
(a) Discuss with examples the Megalithic culture of India in the archaeological context. (20)  
(b) Discuss the bio-cultural factors influencing fertility in light of the relationship between fecundity and fertility. (15)  
(c) Discuss phenomenology as a research method in anthropological studies. (15)

---

### Paper 2

#### SECTION A

**Q1. Write short notes on the following in about 150 words each :** (10x5=50)  
(a) Phylogenetic position and morphological features of Ramapithecus. (10)  
(b) Ethno-archaeological analysis of hunting activities of contemporary tribal communities. (10)  
(c) Distribution of Tibeto-Burman group of languages in India. (10)  
(d) Use of doctrine of Karma and rebirth in justifying the Varna system. (10)  
(e) The Jajmani system and contemporary market economy. (10)

**Q2.**  
(a) Describe the Palaeolithic culture with special reference to Soanian tradition. Indicate the problems of describing the Indian Palaeolithic. (15+5=20)  
(b) What has been the contribution of tribal people to the Indian Independence movement? (15)  
(c) Describe the impact of Buddhism on the tribal populations of India. (15)

**Q3.**  
(a) What kind of society may be reconstructed from the archaeological evidences of Harappan culture? (20)  
(b) Discuss the impact of media on the social life of Indian villages. (15)  
(c) Critically assess the existing plans and programmes meant for tribal welfare. (15)

**Q4.**  
(a) Give an account of the contributions of Iravati Karve and B. S. Guha to the analysis of race and caste in India. (10+10=20)  
(b) What has been the impact of development projects on the environment and livelihood of forest-dwelling tribes? (15)  
(c) Identify some special programmes for particularly vulnerable Tribal Groups (erstwhile PTGs). (15)

#### SECTION B

**Q5. Write short notes on the following in about 150 words each :** (10x5=50)  
(a) Ethnicity and regionalism. (10)  
(b) Panchayati Raj as a facilitator of social inclusion in rural society. (10)  
(c) Anthropological understanding of communalism. (10)  
(d) Issues relating to tribal education. (10)  
(e) Distribution of Neolithic sites in India. (10)

**Q6.**  
(a) Identify the theoretical concepts that have emerged out of village studies in India. (20)  
(b) Critically discuss the role of NGOs in tribal development. (15)  
(c) Describe the impact of industrialization on the economic and social aspects of India’s villages. (15)

**Q7.**  
(a) Discuss how the elements of Little and Great Traditions combine in the emergence of social/political/religious movements, giving any one example to illustrate the issue. (20)  
(b) Write about the role of colonial administration in the development of Anthropology in India. (15)  
(c) What are the salient issues faced by pastoral communities in India? Discuss with suitable examples. (15)

**Q8.**  
(a) Discuss with appropriate examples how tribal unrest may be understood as emerging out of an incompatibility between tribes and the nation-state. (20)  
(b) What has been the impact of non-Hindu religions on the emancipation of Schedule Castes in India? (15)  
(c) What are the constitutional safeguards to protect the interests of the Indian tribes? (15)